Good morning.
This is the Service Management for
Mac OS X talk or as I like to call it,
writing modern daemons in Mac OS X.
So what does that mean?
Let's jump into some terminology.
What is a daemon?
A daemon is a long running
background process.
People don't tend to see it.
It's not in their immediate
view like the finder or Safari.
Well,
we don't just have daemon on the system.
We have super daemon, too.
What is a super daemon?
A super daemon is a daemon that
proxies work on behalf of other
daemons to make their lives easier.
We also have a notion of an agent,
which is more specifically a daemon
that runs in the context of a user.
After you log in,
something like the iChat agent might
run in the background to help iChat out.
Finally, something that's very important
for this talk is the notion
of a communication handle.
We talk about this a lot.
Communication handles a file
descriptor or a Mach port,
something you use to
talk to somebody else,
be it near or far.
also some assumptions I'd really
like to assume that most of
you have prior experience in
writing a Mach or Unix daemon.
Also some familiarity with the Mach or
Unix system calls to be very helpful.
Let's jump right in.
So what is this session about?
It's all about background processes.
You do work on behalf of
a user either directly,
let's say like someone telnet's in,
the telnet server's launched,
or indirectly.
A thing like lookupd which is doing
queries on behalf of applications to look
up users or internet hosts or whatnot.
And finally, your code needs to get
running at some point.
You have work to do.
How do we know when to run you,
if at all?
Now, what's wrong with the status quo?
I believe and we believe that
daemons deserve better treatment.
In both the UNIX and Mac OS world,
daemons were just processes which
disassociated themselves from the user.
They might say core graphics, nope,
don't need you.
They'd call functions to remove
yourself from the user's context.
In the Mac OS 9 world,
we call these faceless
background applications.
Again,
they were just programs which said, nope,
don't need this.
Don't need that.
Oh, yeah,
don't need this subsystem over there.
That's not the way to go.
The solution?
We're going to provide a new super daemon
to manage all the daemons on the system.
It's designed to do work for you.
It's designed to be flexible.
It's designed to support
messaging and control.
And finally,
we're going to call it LaunchD.
A major component of this since we
want all daemon to be used this is
that LaunchD will be open source.
This is a critical objective of ours.
We want Unix daemon to
adopt this technology.
Things like Apache and
Bind and you name it.
Any Unix daemon we'd like
to adopt this technology.
We want to have it be open source.
We want to have it run on FreeBSD and
Linux and Solaris and all those Unixes.
It's in everybody's best interest.
So what are you going to
learn in this session?
The issues a modern daemon writer faces,
things that affect you as a developer,
what LaunchD will provide for you,
what it won't provide for you,
and how to port an
existing daemon to LaunchD.
Also, I'll talk briefly about how
to write a savvy daemon.
So let's talk about some history.
Why do we need to write a new daemon?
Well, in the Unix world,
the classic super daemon is INEDD.
INEDD is responsible for
things like running the Telnet
server or the FTP server,
you name it.
Well, why was it created?
It was created because there was the
observation was made that every daemon
bit did basically the same thing.
It opened a socket and sat there waiting
on accept and then forked a child and
then had the child deal with the client.
Well,
if they're all doing the same thing,
we can have one daemon do that
for them and not have 20 daemons
all running at the same time.
Now, in hindsight, INetD was IP-centric.
It also assumed that there was only
one communication handle per daemon.
This is definitely not true these days
with the invention of things like SSL.
Almost every daemon these days is
listening on at least two ports,
one to handle SSL traffic,
one to handle non-SSL traffic.
Also, in the UNIX world we had
something called a NIT.
A NIT was centric to a
different kind of technology.
It was centric to TTYs,
things like the console login
session or a login session running
on a serial port off on the side.
That was all fine and dandy,
but it was only specific
towards a specific technology.
Also,
to handle different kinds of daemons we
had this callout starting from ETSI RC.
When the system booted we
had a shell script run.
It would then in turn run other things.
Eventually a script of yours would be run
that would let your daemon be launched.
Well, this is very, very static.
This only happens at boot.
There's no notion of
the world might change.
We turn the system off.
I mean,
we put it to sleep and woke it back up.
It would be up somewhere else.
And it also didn't deal
with shutdown very well.
Finally, they also had cron, at,
and batch.
They were time-centric.
That's great, but maybe you want to run
for a different reason.
Maybe you want to be like
sendmail and run once an hour
to deal with spooled mail,
but you also want to deal with
incoming connections on port 25.
In the Mach world,
they had something similar
to INDD called Mockinit.
Mockinit can launch daemons on
demand based on Mach port IPC.
That's great,
but it's only for Mach ports.
What about file descriptors?
Maybe you need both.
So that brings us to today's problems.
There's missing functionality.
First of all,
INED doesn't handle Unix domain sockets
despite them being file descriptors.
We have file system events
to trigger a daemon launch.
Maybe your daemon just sits waiting
for a mail spool to fill up and
then try and drain it periodically.
Well, we'd like to be able to run
your daemon when that spool
directory gets files in it.
Also, INED and INID don't
support user-supplied jobs.
Why can't a normal user just
submit a job to INED saying,
"Hey,
when somebody connects to port 54321,
run my little custom daemon."
You can't do that today.
because the config file is in /etc
and only root can write to that file.
That's a shame.
Also multiple event sources,
like we talked about with inetd,
it only allows you to have
one communication port.
That's just not practical these days.
Worse still, some daemons listen on both
Mach and Unix file descriptors.
Something like the multicast
DNS responders listening on a Mach port
to handle requests from the GUI apps,
but also listening on a file descriptor
to handle the network events.
There's no reason why we can't
launch that daemon on demand today
except that our super daemons
only support one technology.
Ultimately, we believe that time,
file system, IPC events,
all these various event sources need to
be supported in the same super daemon.
We need to be able to launch it on demand
whenever any of your events happen.
: Also, a critical request by many people
is that their daemon automatically
be restarted if they inadvertently
exit or die for whatever reason.
So that's something else we'd
like to support that not all
the super daemons support.
So the future.
We're going to have one
daemon to rule them all.
It's support for transferable-based
event sources at the moment.
We support most file descriptors.
And we will support Mach ports.
Also, support for user supplied jobs is,
we believe, a very critical feature.
We want users to be able to run their
own daemons to support their own needs,
and not need to run their own
super daemon just when we already
have one running on the system.
So what does this mean?
First of all, we want to save you work.
In the Unix world, you need to fork.
You need to call setSid.
You need to close stray file descriptors,
reopen standard I/O as dev null.
It's just a mess.
Again, it goes back to the,
we were a user process.
Now we need to disassociate
ourself from the user input.
And these are some of
the items you need to do.
And nobody likes trying to keep
on top of any new API they need
to call just to disassociate
themselves from the user input.
What are we going to do?
When you hit main,
your program will be pre-daemonized.
You can check in and go.
We're also going to support
launching on demand.
This helps you help us
save system resources.
We will have your communication
handles open and alive even
when you're not running.
And should someone connect to them,
we will then launch you.
It also improves the system boot up.
If we don't need to run
your entire executable,
if we just need to open
your communication handle,
that's less work we need to
do at boot and our users will
appreciate a faster boot up.
It also means we can do
a parallel load-a-boot.
We plan or actually we do implement the
registration of all the communication
handles of all the daemons all at once.
That means that if daemon
A needs to talk to daemon B,
we don't really have a dependency
problem because that dependency is
implicit by their communication through
a file descriptor or a Mach port.
If we register them at the same time,
we don't need to worry about
which one gets launched first.
which helps us to,
if you're used to StartupItems,
the little external dependencies
we've been listing there.
You don't need to track them anymore.
You don't even need to list them.
Also, since we want to support
user-supplied jobs,
we can support something
called user agents.
We're going to standardize the way
background processes run for users.
It allows them also to
launch those on demand.
We've never been able to launch user
agents on demand in any standardized way.
This will help our log-in performance,
which our users will appreciate.
Finally, this is something I'm
really excited about.
We're going to support messaging.
Things like, you know, hey,
Apple file server,
tell me about yourself.
Tell me how many people are connected.
Tell me, you know, who they are.
Tell me about them.
We'd also like to support
controlling daemons.
Things like, hey, AFP server,
why do you disconnect that user?
They're done now.
Or please shut down.
And the daemon can come
back to us and say,
okay, I'm ready to shut down now.
I've written out my log files.
I've closed and cleaned all my state.
Thank you.
I'm done now.
We believe this is very important
for things like database servers,
which might have a lot of work
to do before they shut down.
The old way in the Unix world
was just to send a signal,
cross your fingers,
and hope that they exit someday.
You know, that's not great.
We need to be better than that.
The number of messages that we can
support are potentially endless
and we look forward to feedback
from you on what kinds of messages
you'd like to see sent to you or
messages you'd like to send to us.
What would you like to
tell us about yourself?
Now, let's talk about some case studies.
The real world is what matters.
We have something called
CUPSD on the system.
It's the Common Unix Printing System.
They have a daemon.
Today,
what they did to support restarting
is they used some Mach APIs to
check in with Mockinet and tell it,
"Hey, restart me if I die." That was
extra code they needed to add just
to get restarted in case they exit.
With LaunchD, there's no extra code.
We know you want to keep running.
You're a daemon.
You exist to serve other people.
This simplifies their port
to Mac OS X and makes life
a lot easier for them.
Something I brought up earlier
is the multicast DNS responder.
It uses both Mach ports
and Unix file descriptors.
We'd like to be able to
launch that on demand,
but today we have INED on the right,
just supporting file descriptors,
and we have Mockinit on the
left holding just Mach ports.
They don't know anything
about each other.
One could launch MDNS responder
based on communication on one type
of technology but not the other,
leaving a problem for the MDNS responder
if they want to launch on demand.
Launch de-handles both.
Nothing else does for launch on demand,
and we're very excited about this
support for multiple technologies.
Also, back to the user side,
let's bring another case study example.
The SSH agent is a classic example of
a command line process that people want
to run to support their SSH activities.
A lot of people usually end up creating
these complicated statements at the
beginning of their shell startup
just to make sure that they have only
one SSH agent running on the system.
So they'll create lock files,
then they'll try and see if they
already have an agent running,
and if not, run it,
and then unlock the whole
state that they've built up.
Well, with LaunchD,
you can just drop an XMLP list into
a directory in your home directory,
and at login time,
we will register the SSH agent to launch
on demand the next time you talk to it.
And only one of them
for your login session,
which means all that complicated locking
and checking to see if one's running,
nope.
Don't need to do that.
We're very excited about
this for user agents,
and we...
hope to see more cases
where people use it.
Also, the changes to SSH agent
were very simple.
This is something we're excited about
because it means less work for you guys.
We know pretty much how daemons
operate their state engines.
We know what information they
need in order to get running.
We can get that to you right at
the beginning of your process.
And again, you're pre-daemonized,
so you just take your check-in
information and you can get running.
So, okay,
I've told you about what LaunchD does,
but what doesn't it do?
Well, there's a lot of other kinds
of events on the system.
We have configD's database of key
value pairs or configD's events.
We have the NetInfo database
of key value pairs which can
come and go as the system runs.
We also have the Rendezvous
service advertisements.
Some people want to launch on
demand just by virtue of another
entity showing up on the network.
We also, a very popular one is the
I/O Kit namespace which is
built on top of Mach ports.
And I/O Kit events, again,
built on top of infrastructure already
which is built on top of Mach ports.
Now, I'm going to talk a little bit about
: We wait, you know, not I/O Kit events?
Well,
we have things like the Bluetooth daemon.
It wants to launch when
Bluetooth devices show up.
We, Apple, have our own needs.
We know you have your needs.
So this list that I just gave of things
we don't support is subject to change.
We're probably most likely add those
subsystems in the future as we figure
out how to deal with technologies
that are built on top of each other.
Now, porting.
Let's start jumping
into the meat of things.
We have a simple,
very simple IPC API and a very
simple RTTI-based object system
to support the message passing
that we want to use to communicate
between LaunchD and your daemon.
Now, what does the IPC API look like?
Well, it's kind of,
sort of Core Foundation.
Well, why not Core Foundation?
Portability.
Just about what we talked about earlier.
LaunchD is open source.
This is a very important goal for us
to drive adoption and minimizing our
dependencies helps make adoption easier.
Also,
a stumbling block is the Mach port and
file descriptor passing is not supported
by Core Foundation at the moment.
It's very few people requested.
It was just easier for us to implement
a simple object graph ourself
and support serializing it and
sending it across to the other side.
Finally, really all we need is RTTI,
dictionaries and arrays.
We're just sending
messages back and forth.
So to give you an example
of how simple it is,
this is what the two
basic C APIs look like.
We have LaunchMessage,
which supports sending an object graph
and getting an object graph in response.
And if you're going to be doing any
kind of asynchronous programming,
we have a simple API to get the
file descriptor that we're using
on the back end to communicate with
LaunchD and add it to your own run loop.
If you're using KQ, Select,
it's up to you.
We can give you the file descriptor,
you can add it,
and you can call LaunchMessage when
messages are available to read.
Now, to jump more into the meat of it,
a launch data T represents
an object graph.
It can be anything.
You know, we have the RTTI.
That's what makes it fun.
And you can introspect it as you
get a response back or you can send
just about any message you want.
Also, launch message,
while it appears synchronous
for the common case,
it actually, well,
launch message is synchronous
for the common case.
It returns null and sets error, no,
and failure,
plain and simple for the simple case.
Now, if you do send a message
requesting that asynchronous
messages be sent in response,
you can then call launch message
with no message to send by
using null as a parameter.
And then you'll get any
asynchronous message back.
And you can keep calling and keep calling
and keep calling until you get null back.
And if error no is equal to zero,
then there's no more
asynchronous messages.
And if it's obviously equal to
something not equal to zero,
then there's a problem.
Now let's talk about those messages
we're sending back and forth.
You know,
RTTI and container classes are fun.
We have dictionaries, we have arrays,
and we have some basic objects
to match the C basic types.
We have file descriptors, Mach ports,
integers, real numbers, booleans,
strings, and finally opaque
data should we need it.
Now, again,
it's just enough for IPC and no more.
We have get and set operations
for the basic types,
and in the case of dictionaries,
we allow insertion, lookup, removal,
and iterate.
Again, all we need for IPC.
For arrays,
get and set index and get count.
It's enough to introspect
and set up an object graph.
That's all we need.
Now to understand the object graphs
we're going to be sending back and forth,
let's talk about the XMLP list that
you'll use to configure a daemon for us
to run at a later point in the system.
You're going to have something like a
label to uniquely identify your job,
and that really is the unique key.
This is in case someone
wants to control your daemon,
the label is what they're
going to use to send it,
you know, turn it on, turn it off,
change some attribute of it.
That's the important key.
You can have things like the username
that you want the daemon to run as,
the group name, program name,
and pretty much any kind of environmental
setup you need to get the daemon running.
You know, I want the daemon to run
in that working directory,
I want to have this argument
and this environment variable.
Any kind of setup detail
we plan on supporting.
Now, if you notice at the bottom
of the list back there we had
something called Event Sources.
They're all about the
details of how to set up file
descriptors in the Mach ports.
You know, who to connect to, you know,
where to listen.
Particularly file descriptors can be very
complicated since there are different
technologies that can back them.
You've got IPv4, IPv6,
Unix domain sockets.
It could be a new type of
technology that we don't know
about that requires different
APIs to set up the file descriptor.
And we need all these
details put in one place.
So this is what the Event Sources are.
Now, before we send an
XMLP list over to LaunchD,
we actually do some data distillation.
We're going to turn those
usernames into UIDs,
the group names into GIDs,
and we're going to take all those
event sources and actually translate
them down to the file descriptors
and Mach ports that back them.
And then the resulting
object graph is much,
much simpler.
It requires no lookups by LaunchD to
find out the actual details of anything.
And the great thing is,
since we've translated
things to file descriptors,
any kind of security
check the kernel would do,
we don't need to replicate.
Now, let's look at some example messages.
Life's pretty simple.
You might want to submit a job
and then you're going to have
that translated XMLP list.
You might want to remove a job.
Well, then you just need the label.
You might want to get the jobs.
You might want to introspect launch D.
You might want to find out what
daemons are running on the system.
That'll get you a big
dictionary coming back.
You might want to check in.
You're a daemon.
You can send a check in message and the
file descriptors and Mach ports that you
have allocated to you will come back and
you can proceed with them as you wish.
And finally, something that supports for
things like the SSH agent is
we need a notion of getting,
unsetting,
and querying an environment that
isn't directly tied to your shell.
Now, something that we're still working
on is becoming launch-d savvy.
If you remember,
I talked to you about sending
messages to control it.
Tell me about the users
you have connected to you.
Please,
I want to disconnect this user over here.
We're still figuring this stuff out.
We look forward to your feedback and
definitely some updated documentation
for you in the Tiger timeframe so that
way you can understand what introspection
and control operations we supply.
Now let's hash things out again.
So predaymonization,
we believe this is very,
very important for you.
It means, again,
you're going to hit main and
your daemon is ready to run.
You don't need to worry about
disassociating yourself from any
kind of subsystem on the system,
be it the graphics or maybe Apple script.
I actually don't program at that level,
but at least in the Unix world,
no forking, no call set SID,
no closing stray file
descriptors left behind.
But who knows what shell?
Life's good.
Now you just need to check in and go.
Also, again,
we automatically support restarting.
So should you decide that
your configuration file
changed and you want to rerun,
just exit.
We'll launch you again the next
time someone connects to you.
Also,
something we hope you will take advantage
of is the multiple event sources.
You might have a file descriptor
or 20 file descriptors.
We can listen on all of them on
your behalf and run you whenever
activity happens on any one of them.
If you listen on a few Mach ports, sure,
tell us about them.
We'll launch you when
activity happens on them too.
We also,
those user agents are very excited about,
should you have a foreground slash
background application combination?
Well, maybe you don't want,
maybe the user doesn't want
the foreground application to
necessarily run every time at login,
but they still want the
background activity to run.
The example I like to continuously
point back to is the iChat agent.
You have the menu link.
It supports showing you
which users are connected,
but maybe you don't want
iChat running at login,
but you do want the menu,
you do want to log in.
Well, with LaunchD,
we can run the iChat agent
at login without running
the foreground application.
So to give you an example demo,
I would like to show the
SSH agent running under LaunchD,
and I would like to show our debug
daemon running under LaunchD and
acting as a pseudo web server to tell
you about LaunchD itself by doing the
introspection that I talked about.
So to show you,
let's show you the web server.
I have -- this is a representation of the
object graph coming back from LaunchD.
shows you that here's our key.
We have the com.apple.launch debugd.
We run it on demand.
There's a Boolean set to true.
It's got a PID of 328.
If I reload this web page, you'll see,
you know, we keep launching it on demand
because this number is changing.
We have some, you know,
various setup details in
which UID to run it as.
If you notice, it's running as me,
the user.
Finally, there's two file descriptors
we're listening on.
They happen to represent the IPv4 and
IPv6 socket that were set up by the user.
And also, look at this.
We have an SSH agent.
It's also running on demand.
It doesn't have a PID set yet because
no one's tried to talk to him yet.
And this is the Unix domain
socket he's listening on.
So if we go back to the terminal,
we can run SSHAd.
And now if we go back
here and run it again,
we see that the SSH agent
launched on demand.
How did this all happen?
Well, it goes back to the simple plist we
talked about dropping on the system.
If you see in tilde
library launch agents,
we have a couple plists.
There's that launch debug D that
I talked about and the SSH agent.
And they're pretty simple files.
We got com open SSH.
All we have is again here's that label,
here's the program arguments and
the listeners which the event
sources which get distilled down
to an actual file descriptor.
So in this case we have a little secure
socket with an environmental key which
if you're using SSH agent you're familiar
with and the socket type we need.
Now, that can show you how
simple it can be to -- oh,
I might as well show the -- I
So here's the debug daemon, for example.
It just listens on a port 12345,
happens to be a passive socket,
and it's a SOC stream.
And what ends up happening,
if you're familiar with
the get adder info API,
is we take these details,
we throw it a get adder info,
and take whatever adder info
structures come back and allocate a
file descriptor for each one of them,
and then send it over to launchd,
and it just listens on them.
So in this case,
IPv4 and IPv6 sockets came back,
and that can change in the future,
and your daemon wouldn't
even need to know about it.
A new type of communication
technology might come out,
and you don't care.
As long as it's a file descriptor
and it comes back to you,
you can get events off
of it and handle them.
So we're very excited about this.
And I believe it's time for Q&A now.
Yeah.
Oh, also for more information you
can talk to Jason and yeah.
And this source will be
on the developer website,
the Darwin developer website.